# LIFERAY-DOCS

<!-- Icon here -->

Welcome to Liferay's official documentation repository, home to
[Liferay Developer Network](https://dev.liferay.com/) articles. You can
contribute new articles and submit fixes for existing articles in this
repository. The articles are written in
[Markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/syntax) text for
uploading to the Liferay Developer Network. To render article drafts as HTML
locally, you can execute a [`convert`](bin/) script. You have style guidelines
for [writing](guidelines/writers-guidelines.markdown) and following
[Markdown conventions](guidelines/writers-guidelines.markdown), to
produce documentation that is comprehensive and consistent. 

## Getting Started

If you’re new to the `liferay-docs` repository, you’ll need to clone the project
locally to begin adding/editing material. For more information on how to do
this, visit the [How do I use Git and GitHub?]() FAQ.

To add a new article you’ve written and its encompassing images to this
repository, you’ll need to place it in the appropriate `new-articles` folder.
The repository is laid out similarly to how it’s displayed in [Liferay’s
Developer Network (LDN)](https://dev.liferay.com/). For example, if your article
should reside in the Develop section of LDN, then paste your article into the
`new-articles` folder residing in the `liferay-docs/develop` directory. For more
information on where to place new articles and the guidelines on writing them,
visit the following [FAQ]().

Your new article should be written in Markdown, which is a text format designed
so it can be converted to HTML. Sometimes converting the Markdown to HTML is the
easiest way to ensure you’ve correctly formatted your text. You can convert your
Markdown to HTML by using *convert* scripts that this repository provides. Visit
the [How do I convert my Markdown using the provided convert scripts?]() FAQ for
details on how to use them.

If you’d like to edit an existing article, you can open it in its current
location and make the necessary updates. There is no need to reproduce the
article by placing it in the new-articles folder.

After you’ve made your changes, you’ll need to commit them and submit a Github
pull request. To learn more about committing your changes and submitting pull
requests, visit the [How do I use Git and GitHub?]() FAQ. You should submit all
pull requests to the default `liferay` user.

Once your pull request is submitted, Liferay’s documentation team will review
your additions/changes, merge them into the `liferay-docs` repo, and publish
them on LDN.

