# Touring Liferay's User Interface

Liferay's user interface is designed to be simple and intuitive. For the
official Liferay UI tour, you'll focus on the default landing page after logging
in. There are several menu options and buttons to choose from, by default. The
first thing you'll do is discover the purposes behind each menu. After you have
a brief understanding of Liferay's UI, you'll begin to set up an example Liferay
instance called the *Lunar Resort*. This example instance is frequently
referenced throughout this Guide, and will evolve as you progress through the
User's Guide documentation.

## Exploring Liferay's Default Menus

<!-- Document this when UI is stable for 7.0 -Cody -->

## Setting Up the Lunar Resort Website

Suppose that you've been assigned the task of building a web site for an
innovative new company called Lunar Resort, Inc. You've decided to take
advantage of Liferay and its rapid deployment features as well as its ability to
get a fully functional, content-rich web site with integrated social features up
and running in little time. This section will get you started. You'll walk
through the creation of the Lunar Resort's web site, starting by creating and
publishing some simple content using Liferay's built-in WYSIWYG editor. Later in
the chapter, you'll take advantage of Liferay's robust structure editor. Then
you'll use templates to display the content. You'll also explore some of the
advanced publishing features such as the built-in workflow and Asset Publisher
in later chapters.

First, a little housekeeping. If you're going to be managing the Lunar Resort,
your Liferay instance should also be called *Lunar Resort*. To set general
information about your Liferay instance like the name and mail domain, go to the
Product Menu &rarr; Control Panel and select *Portal Settings* under the
Configuration heading. You could set up the configuration for the Lunar Resort
as follows.

![Figure 2.2: You can change the portal settings by navigating to the Control Panel and selecting *Portal Settings*.](../../../images/04-web-content-changing-settings.png)

<!-- Replace above image with 7.0 UI. -Cody -->

You can also customize the logo in the top left corner of every page by
selecting *Display Settings* under the *Miscellaneous* tab on the panel to the
right. Once you've made the changes, you can begin creating pages. With most
products, you would learn what the software can do in terms of setting up your
users and security model and then start building your system. You'd design your
infrastructure and get your server environment up and running while your
developers write the applications that live on your web site. With Liferay,
however, you start farther ahead. Liferay is more than just a *container* for
applications with a robust security model. It already includes many of the
applications you'll need, out of the box. These applications are ready to go and
are integrated with the rest of Liferay's user management and security features.

Now that your Lunar Resort portal is created, continue on to begin creating
sites for it.
