# Web Experience Management

**Experience**; consider that word for a moment. Not the type of experience you
gain with repetition, but the contact or encounter you have with something. For
example, if you're hiking in the woods and are mauled by a black panther, you
would consider this a *bad* hiking experience. Suppose you travel to your local
food market and someone gives you a large amount of money for no reason other
than to be nice. You would consider this a *great* grocery shopping experience.

These two examples may be a bit extreme, so let's tone this down to something a
little more practical. Suppose you're a huge sports fan and you're contemplating
whether to buy tickets to the big game next week. What are some of the things
you might consider that would determine whether you attend the game or not? The
*price* of the tickets is usually the most important factor. Others may include
parking accessibility, distance to the game, quality of your favorite team,
and other factors. To determine whether you attend the game, you weigh the
negative factors, like price and the stadium's nightmarish parking setup, with
the reason you're attending the game, the *experience*. If you expect the
experience of seeing your favorite team play to trump the negative factors, you'll
attend. If you expect the experience will be bad or worse than the negative
factors you expect to encounter, you'll stay home and watch the game on TV.

@product@ takes the *experience* factor very seriously when it comes to web
management. Just like the sports fan that weighs the experience vs. the live
game headaches, the user/administrator also weighs the experience of using a web
platform with the resulting site created on it. With the apps and features
provided with @product@'s Web Experience Management suite and Modern Site 
Building, the management of sites, pages, and content is seamless.

## Modern Site Building

Some products offer simple easy to use WYSIWYG page and content creation to 
enable anyone to build a website. Other products provide powerful tools for 
developers and designers to work together to perfectly realize a vision.
With @product_version@ we ask, "Why not both?"

All of Liferay's powerful, but user friendly content creation tools are 
available to empower users to create sites without the need to understand web 
development, and in addition, Liferay's Modern Site Building suite lets 
experienced web developers get under the hood to create anything they can 
imagine.

### Liferay Content Management

Whether you're new to Liferay or a Liferay veteran, Liferay's Content 
Management provides page creation and management, a WSYSIWYG editor, a Media 
Library, and tools for dynamic content publication. Content management provides 
a user friendly experience for less technical users while providing tools for 
more complex content creation like Structures and Templates for developers.

### Modern Site Building

In addition to having all of the Content Management tools available, Modern 
Site Building provides a HTML, CSS, and Javascript editor for developers to 
realize beautiful designs by creating Fragments. Fragments are just that -- 
fragments of a complete page. Once Fragments are created, you can use them to 
build Content Pages and deploy them to your site.

## Bringing it all together

In our online documentation, you'll learn how to use all of the tools available 
for building your site with Liferay, and what kind of tools will be the best to 
use for your use case. Just as the die-hard fan knew he'd have a great 
experience when buying his tickets to the big game, you can expect a great and 
seamless web experience with @product@.
