Preface

Liferay Social Office is Liferay's brand new social collaboration
product for the enterprise. We are excited to bring both the product and
this book to you, in the hope that you'll be able to use each to enable
your teams to work together more efficiently.

Some time ago, we at Liferay were brainstorming some common use cases
which Liferay Portal does a good job solving. One of these is team-based
collaboration. Many of our customers have used Liferay Portal both
inside their enterprises and outside on the Internet to provide a better
way of sharing documents and data with the people with whom they work
every day. Liferay Portal provides a very flexible solution which allows
you to do that. But it can also do much, much more. Because Liferay
Portal has that flexibility, the path from the initial install to a
robust web site that could be used for collaboration was not always
straightforward to the new user. Business users wanted a product they
could install and use right away.

This was not the only reason for the new product. Internally, we
realized that we needed a product like this ourselves, and that we
already had all the features in place to make it possible. We just
needed to assemble them together in a way that most optimally supported
the scenario of social collaboration, and we wanted to make getting set
up as easy as possible for new users.

In this way, Social Office was born. We created the product to provide a
simple, out of the box solution for team collaboration. Using Liferay
Portal as a base, Social Office provides you with a fantastic array of
features that you don't have to spend a lot of time configuring. In
fact, you can have a full production environment set up in less time
than it takes to brew a pot of coffee.

Though it sounds like this is a brand new product, it's in many ways an
older, proven solution as well. Since it uses Liferay Portal as a base,
it inherits all the benefits of a mature, stable solution which has been
in the marketplace for some time. In addition to this, we've had an
early adopter program, and the product is already in production use with
multiple customers. It has even received industry recognition: it's in
the Gartner magic quadrant for social software, and has been mentioned
as the only open source, Java-based solution for collaboration in a
comparison review of products in this space.

Since our early adopter program was so successful, we're excited to
finally release the product to the general public. Customers who have
already started using it have been exceptionally pleased with the
results, and you gain the benefit from our collaboration with those
early adopters. In fact, this is one of the great things about open
source: we've received extensive feedback on the product, including bug
fixes and feature requests. Our customers have told us whether things
are intuitive or not, and we've incorporated that feedback right back
into the product.

This book is for those who are setting up and administering an
installation of Liferay Social Office. From installing Social Office to
introducing you to its entire feature set, you'll see all of the things
Social Office can do to help your team. We hope you'll use it as a tool
to get Social Office up, running, and integrated into your enterprise.

**Conventions**

Sections are broken up into multiple levels of headings, and these are
designed to make it easy to find information.

Source code and configuration file directives are presented like this.

If source code goes multi-line, the lines will be \\

separated by a backslash character like this.

![image](../../images/00-preface_html_5c790363.png) **Tip:** This is a tip. Tips are
used to indicate a suggestion or a piece of information that affects
whatever is being talked about in the surrounding text. They are always
accompanied by this gray box and the icon to the left.

\
\

*Italics* are used to represent links or buttons to be clicked on in a
user interface and to indicate a label or a name of a Java class.

**Bold** is used to describe field labels and portlets.

Page headers denote the chapters, and footers denote the particular
section within the chapter.

**Publisher Notes**

It's our hope that this book is valuable to you, and that it's an
indispensable resource as you begin to administer a Social Office
server. If you need any assistance beyond what's covered in this book,
Liferay, Inc. offers training, consulting, and support services to fill
any need that you might have. Please see
[http://www.](http://www.liferay.com/web/guest/services)[liferay](http://www.liferay.com/web/guest/services)[.com/services](http://www.liferay.com/web/guest/services)
for further information about the services we can provide.

As always, we welcome any feedback. If there is any way you think we
could make this book better, please feel free to mention it on our
forums. You can also use any of the email addresses on our *Contact Us*
page
([http://www.](http://www.liferay.com/web/guest/about_us/contact_us)[](http://www.liferay.com/web/guest/about_us/contact_us)[liferay](http://www.liferay.com/web/guest/about_us/contact_us)[.com/contact\_us](http://www.liferay.com/web/guest/about_us/contact_us)).
We are here to serve you, our users and customers, and to help make your
experience using Social Office the best it can be.

**Author Notes**

Special thanks are due to my co-authors, Stephen Kostas and Michelle
Hoshi, who turned around their chapter assignments in record time while
the product was changing under them. I also cannot underestimate the
help of Ryan Parks in quickly answering our calls for help and in giving
us further explanation of various features. And I must also make special
mention of Stephen Wilburn, who copy edited this document. I thought the
text was pretty clean, but he slogged through our hastily written prose
with an attention to detail that made it look like monkeys had typed
this thing. If you find this book to be readable, it's because of him.

As always, we hope this book is useful to you as you begin your journey
with Liferay Social Office!

\
\

Rich Sezov

June, 2010

iii
