# Introduction

“Help!”

This has been the cry of information workers everywhere who have tried
to manage complex projects through email and shared folders. You've
probably had a similar experience: you're collaborating on a document
with a team of people and are emailing it back and forth. Person A
creates the initial document and Person B replies with some edits.
Person C replies with additional edits at the same time Person A replies
with the corrections from Person B. Person D takes this and rewrites a
whole section of the document while Person B and C respond to Person A's
update. Pretty soon, it becomes very difficult to determine which
document is the latest document.

The same scenario plays itself out when working in shared folders.
Person A creates a document and puts it in a network share. Person B
edits the document and saves it under a different file name. Person C
edits it and re-saves the original. Person A tries to reconcile the two,
while Person D opens Person B's document and saves yet another version.
Before you know it, you have the same problem you had with email: you
can't tell which document is the latest document. Additionally, you have
a worse problem: you don't have a clear history of how the document got
to where it is in the first place.

“Help!”

Liferay Social Office is a collaboration tool that is designed to answer
that call for help by meeting the needs of teams who work together on
projects. It is an easy-to-install web application that facilitates
collaboration for large and small businesses alike. With Liferay Social
Office, you'll have the system and your workgroups up and running in no
time, with all the tools necessary for them to work more efficiently and
more easily than before.

## What can you do with Social Office?

Social Office gives you the social collaboration features you need to do
virtual teamwork. You can coordinate calendars and schedules, write
shared blog entries, work together on documents, discuss issues in
forums, document everything in a wiki, and more. The underlying theme is
that *all discussion and collaboration is kept with the asset.* What
does this mean? It means that the *asset*, whether that be a document, a
thread, a blog entry, or a wiki article is the star around which all of
the discussion and collaboration orbits.

Trying to collaborate on assets through email or server shares works up
to a certain point—but then it fails because it's a backwards way of
doing the work. The asset in that scenario becomes secondary, and the
“wrapper”—email or the share—becomes the primary target of the work. So
instead of concentrating on the asset which the team is trying to
produce, the focus turns to the wrapper. In the case of a shared folder,
you might manually rename documents according to a numbering scheme so
everyone can tell which is the latest—that is, until someone forgets to
do so, or until someone accidentally overwrites the latest document. In
the case of email, users try to navigate huge threads while passing an
asset back and forth—until someone forgets to “reply all” or until
someone starts a new thread (and maybe forgets to put the whole list on
the thread). Working in the mediums of shared folders or email puts the
focus on working with the wrapper, not the asset. And so what happens is
the asset gets lost because they're forced to focus on the wrapper
instead of the asset. With Social Office, you will be free to
concentrate on their assets—the system gets out of your way so that it's
a simple matter for your team to work together.

## How is Social Office Different from Liferay Portal?

Social Office benefits from its core, which is based on Liferay Portal.
Users of both will find a comfortable, familiar interface, because many
of the applications in Social Office come from Liferay Portal. However,
while the core software is similar, the two are tooled for different
purposes.

![image](../../images/01-introduction_html_m1e414b5b.png)\
*Illustration 1: The difference between Liferay Portal and Social
Office*

Liferay Portal is a full featured web portal, containing an
industry-leading suite of built-in applications and tools. It's highly
customizable and businesses use it to run major web sites all over the
world. We've optimized Liferay Portal for creating state-of-the art,
robust web sites that serve millions of users every day.

Social Office has a more focused purpose. We've designed it for work
groups needing to collaborate on documents and data in the office. The
included tools and defaults were carefully chosen to provide users
working within a group the ability to easily communicate, collaborate,
and coordinate their tasks. Additional applications were added to the
product to support these goals.

If you're creating a public web site and need the full features of an
unparalleled, industry-leading engine to power that site, Liferay Portal
is the ideal solution for you. If, however, you're creating a site
that's designed to help people within specific groups communicate and
accomplish tasks on a corporate Intranet, Social Office will help you
accomplish that with minimal set up and administration.

## Social Office Concepts

Liferay Social Office is designed around the concept of users and their
work. For this reason, everything in Social Office is centered around
keeping you up to date on the activities of your teammates. This works
not only within individual teams, but also across all the teams of which
you're a member. To do this, Liferay Social Office gives each user his
or her own personal space, and each team has its own site where its work
is stored. Using the power of Liferay's social API, users' activities
are tracked and reported to the rest of the team.

![image](../../images/01-introduction_html_4a66db0a.png)\
*Illustration 2: The three components which make Social Office work*

For example, if a user on Team A shares a document, that activity is
displayed not only in Team A's activities, but also in each team
member's activities. This provides the ability for the rest of the team
to know what work is being done as soon as possible, and then they can
respond by making their own contributions.

There are really only three concepts which Liferay Social Office uses to
accomplish all of this: Users, Applications, and Sites. Let's take a
closer look at each to see how you can use Social Office to help your
teams work better.

### Users

Users are at the core of Social Office. In order to interact with and
use Social Office, you must have a user account. Users can register
themselves or the system can be set up so that your account is created
by an administrator. Administrators have full control over the entire
site, can create and delete other users and sites, and can take care of
the initial configuration. Administrators can also create additional
users with administrative capabilities.

Power Users are advanced users who can create Sites, but have no access
to the Control Panel, and therefore cannot create users or set
permissions. Power users take care of the day-to-day operations of their
Sites.

Other users are the regular members of your team who use the system to
get their day-to-day work done. They can view the Sites they to which
they have membership and they can interact with files and documents on
those Sites.

### Applications

Users make use of applications every day in Social Office to get their
work done. Each page on every site in Social Office is only as useful as
the applications installed on it. The available applications range from
utilities for online information such as weather forecasts or RSS feeds,
to blog and wiki tools, and more.

By default, each user has a number of applications installed on his or
her home page. Users have full control over their personal pages: they
can add or remove applications from their pages and adjust the settings
for available applications. This ability can be modified or removed
altogether by administrators.

When a new site is created, it's pre-populated with pages and
applications on those pages. In many cases, each application gets a page
of its own; in other cases, applications are aggregated together on a
single page to provide a unified place where users can see all the new
information that their teammates have posted.

Owners of sites are free to add or remove applications from pages on
their sites. Regular users will not have the ability to do so. In this
way, site owners can maintain the most optimal working environments for
their users.

### Sites

Sites are the structure that holds everything else in Social Office
together. Every page contained in Social Office is part of a
Site—including users' personal pages, which are just personal Sites.
Sites are, at first glance, a collection of pages with specific
functions, but they are also the basis of a sort of user “community.”
Users can be members of certain Sites either by assignment or by
invitation, and once they are members they can use the full capabilities
of the Site, as well as receive notification of various activities.

Sites ultimately become the key to good collaboration in Social Office,
because each Site contains its own Calendar and set of events, as well
as its own Document Library, Wiki, Blog, and Announcements. These tools
enable members of a Site to communicate effectively with each other.
Personal Sites help individual users as they log in to see an aggregated
list of activities. This list comes from the activities of all the teams
with whom they are collaborating. This way, users can see at a glance
everything that's happening with their work, and they can respond very
easily to anything that needs attention across all of the Sites of which
they are members.

Here's an example of how it all comes together:

Ryan, Jim, and Michael are all members of the Sales Site. Ryan schedules
a meeting for the whole Sales team about a new product launch and puts
it on the Calendar. When Jim and Michael log in, they both receive a
notification of the meeting. Jim can't make the meeting, but he's been
maintaining the Sales Wiki for new products, so he asks Michael to
update it for him after the meeting.

Michael updates the Wiki with the new information after the meeting, and
Ryan posts a summary of what happened in the meeting in the Sales Blog.
When Jim logs in the next day, he'll receive a notification of the new
Blog post with the information he missed, as well as a notification
about the updated Wiki. Additionally, he can easily access those pages
to catch up on what he missed. This works because Social Office
automatically keeps everyone up to date on the activities of the teams
they work with every day.

## Navigating Social Office

Liferay Social Office has two primary areas of navigation: the global
navigation area and the Site navigation area. These are detailed in two
toolbars at the top of the screen. The global navigation also includes a
persistent search option as well as the ability to click on the company
logo in the top left corner to return to the logged-in user's home page.

![image](../../images/01-introduction_html_m2e7a123e.png)\
*Illustration 3: The Social Office interface*

\
\

Beneath the global navigation is the site navigation. Beneath this is
the application area, where one or more applications can reside. Users
will primarily use the application area in their day-to-day work.

Social Office dynamically shows or hides links in the navigation based
on the permissions of the logged-in user. For example, administrators
will see links to the Control Panel, Applications, and the Layout
templates, while regular users will not.

## Summary

As you can see, Liferay Social Office provides you with an unbeatable,
web-based solution for team collaboration. It allows your team to work
unhindered, getting out of their way so that they can put their focus on
their work instead of worrying about how the system works. And it gives
you peace of mind in knowing that all assets are in one place and
protected by a system that supports proper document versioning so that
you can see the full progression of how your assets got to their final
form. We've worked hard to make Social Office a pleasure to work with,
and we think you'll agree that it helps your teams work better.
