# Managing Users

Ever heard a  retailer advertise themselves as a "one stop shop" for anything
you want? The idea is they have so much stuff that whatever you're looking for
is probably there. Liferay's Control Panel is something like this. Where do you
create users, organizations, or sites? Where do you configure permissions and
plugins and pretty much anything else? You do it from the Control Panel. When
signed in to Liferay as an administrator, you can access the Control Panel from
the Product Menu by clicking *Control Panel*.

<!-- REPLACE [Figure 1: Administrators can access the Control Panel from the Product
Menu.](../../images/usrmgmt-control-panel.png) -->

The Control Panel is divided into four main areas: Users, Sites, Apps,
and Configuration. The Users section lets you create and manage users,
organizations, user groups, roles, and password policies. If monitoring has been
enabled for your portal, you can also view all of the live portal sessions of
your users from this area of the Control Panel. If the Audit plugins have been
installed from Liferay Marketplace, the Audit section also appears.

The Users section of the Control Panel is used for most administrative tasks
involving user management. There, you'll find an interface for the creation and
maintenance of the following portal entities: users, organizations, user groups,
and roles. 

Managing sites, teams, site templates, and page templates is covered in detail
elsewhere. Remember that it's possible and sometimes simpler to use sites, site
memberships, and teams to organize users and manage permissions than it is to
use organizations, user groups, and custom roles.

Portal administrators use the Users section of the Control Panel to create
users, organizations, and user groups, implement security via roles and
permissions, and generally administer users. Only users with the administrator
role, which is a portal scoped role, have permission to view the Control Panel.
You can, however, grant permissions to view the Control Panel to existing or
custom roles.

In this set of articles you'll learn about managing users. You can get started
learning about managing users in Liferay just by perusing the Control Panel, but
there's so much User Management functionality in Liferay that it's tough to wrap
your head around it all and you might not end up doing things optimally. So keep
reading!

<!-- REPLACE [Figure 2: The Users section of the Control Panel. This screenshot shows a portal that doesn't have the EE Audit plugin installed.](../../images/usrmgmt-users.png) -->

Begin exploring Liferay's User Management functionality by reading about
adding and editing users. 

<!-- Perhaps make a table showing similarities and differences between the
parallel sites vs. portal-wide user functionality
-->
