# Creating Web Content

Liferay's Web Content Management (WCM) system allows non-technical users to publish
content to the web without having advanced knowledge of web technology or
programming of any sort. Liferay WCM empowers you to publish your content with a
simple point and click interface and it helps you to keep your site fresh.
You'll find yourself easily creating, editing, and publishing content within
just a few minutes of being exposed to its features. But Liferay WCM doesn't
sacrifice power for simplicity. If need be, you can use your developer skills to
create complex presentation layer templates that make your content "pop" with
dynamic elements. Once these templates have been deployed into the portal, your
non-technical users can manage content using these templates as easily as they
would manage static content. All of this makes Liferay WCM an appropriate choice
both for sites with only a few pages and for sites with gigabytes of content. 

Nearly all Liferay users use Liferay's Web Content Management system.
After all, every web site has content that needs to be managed. Liferay's
WCM empowers you to manage all the content on your site quickly and easily
within your browser. Beyond managing existing content, Liferay's WCM lets users
easily create and manage everything from simple articles containing text and
images to fully functional web sites. Web publishing works alongside Liferay
Portal's larger collection of applications, which means you can add shopping
cart functionality, visitor polls, web forms, site collaboration tools and more.
Everything is done with our collection of easy-to-use tools with familiar
rich-text editors and an intuitive interface. 

With Liferay's WCM, you have the ability to create, edit, stage, approve, and
publish content with easy-to-learn yet powerful tools. Liferay's WCM streamlines
the content creation process for end users. It's much faster to use Liferay's
WCM than it would be to create all the content for your site in HTML. WCM is
integrated with Liferay's services so advanced template developers can use them
to query for data stored elsewhere in Liferay.

By the time you're done, you'll be able to apply all these concepts to your own
content. To demonstrate Liferay's Web Content Management features, you'll create
and manage content on the portal for the ambitious (and fictitious) *Lunar
Resort* project. The Lunar Resort project specializes in facilitating lunar
vacations. It provides space shuttle transportation from the Earth to the Moon
and back, offers the use of a state-of-the-art recreational facility enclosed by
a large, transparent habitat dome, and even rents out lunar rovers. Once you're
familiar with Liferay WCM, you'll wonder how the Lunar resort's portal could
ever manage without it! 
