# Collaboration

What comes to mind when you think of *collaboration*? 

George Lucas, Steven Spielberg, and John Williams collaborated to give us the
thrilling adventure story, fantastic stunt sequences, and adrenaline pumping
score in the Indiana Jones films. 

Bono, Bill Gates, and others join forces annually at the World Economic Forum
to take on world issues such as poverty and AIDS. 

Now, you might not be a celebrity or a renowned scientist, but you have
important things to accomplish. And no matter whether you're saving lives,
exploring the universe, or entertaining the masses, you're typically much more
effective doing it with others. As you work together, your collective ability to
brainstorm ideas, produce something unique, and present it to the outside world
are key components to successful collaboration. 

@product@'s collaboration suite resonates with apps and features that foster
excellent communication. The Message Boards app gives your team a platform for 
discussions, questions and answers, and comments. Use the Blogs app to publish 
your ideas using rich content, so readers can understand them clearly and 
respond to them. Collaboration is enhanced in all these applications by 
mentioning other users--tagging them by name to get their attention or give them 
kudos. 

As you produce digital assets--documents, videos, audio--you can store and share
them using the Documents and Media Library. It both provides its own repository 
and connects to external CMIS repositories and even Google Docs&trade; via the 
Liferay Plugin for Google Drive&trade; from the
[Liferay Marketplace](https://web.liferay.com/marketplace). 

Finally, you can collaborate on and publish content in a number of different
ways. You and your colleagues can build a wealth of information using Wikis and 
create hierarchies of official documentation in a Knowledge Base. 

These are just some of the ways the Collaboration Suite helps you communicate,
produce, and present. In short, it empowers you to labor together with others in
doing amazing things! 



