## Using the Documents and Media Management Bar

Documents and Media lists your current folder's subfolders and file entries. A
*file entry* is the Document Library's representation of a file. It wraps the
file to better leverage it within @product@ and to associate additional
information and metadata with the file. File entries are displayed using icons,
by default. You can select either icon
(![Icon](../../../../images/icon-icon-style.png)), descriptive
(![Descriptive](../../../../images/icon-descriptive-style.png)), or list
(![List](../../../../images/icon-list-style.png)) display style. The icon 
display style shows a file as a cover image. If the file is an image type file, 
the image is used as the file entry's cover image. If the file isn't an image,
Documents and Media displays a generic image for that file type. Also displayed
with each file icon is the file's suffix (e.g., *JPG* for a file ending in
`.jpg`), last modification timestamp, name, and status (e.g., *Approved*,
*Draft*, etc.). And each file has an Actions menu. The actions are also
available from within the file entry's view, which we'll explore soon. The
descriptive and list display styles provide the same functionality, but display
the file entries in rows.

![Figure 5: Documents and Media's lists files using several display styles: icon (as shown here), descriptive, and list. And breadcrumbs show the current folder's path in the library.](../../../../images/dm-images-in-admin.png)

To see the current folder's details click the *Information* icon
(![**i**](../../../../images/icon-information.png)). An area with the folder's 
name appears. It shows the number of items in the folder. It also shows a 
*Subscribe* icon 
(![Subscribe](../../../../images/icon-star.png)) you can select to get
notifications about files added to or modified in the folder. Lastly, the
Actions icon lists actions you can perform on the current folder. Above the
Information icon and Display Styles is a *Search* that enables you to find files
by keywords.

On the other side of the screen also in the top area is a filtering selector.
It's default option is *All*. Click it to see the other filter options. The
*All* option (default) shows all of the current folder's immediate subfolders
and files. The *Recent* filter shows the most recently modified files, *Mine*
lists all the current user's files (no matter their folder), and *Document
Types* filters on files of the selected document type. If a Document Library
contains more documents than it can display at once, you can use the navigation
tool at the bottom of the app's window to either switch your view to another
page or configure the page to display more documents per page.

Next to the filtering selector, the *Order by* selector lets you select criteria
for ordering the files and folders. You can order them by creation date, title,
number of downloads, modification date (default), or size. The up and down
arrows next to the *Order by* selector, let you arrange them in ascending or
descending order.

From the list view, Documents and Media lets you act on one or more files at
once. When you select a checkbox for one or more files, the following action
icons appear: ![Action Icons](../../../../images/dm-action-icons.png). 
Describing them from left to right, the X is for canceling file checkout, the 
secured lock is for file check-out, the unsecured lock is for file check-in, the 
arrows are for moving the files, and the trash can is for moving files to the 
Recycle Bin. You can also move selected files to a subfolder via drag and drop. 
File check-out and check-in is explained in
[Collaborating on Files](/discover/portal/-/knowledge_base/7-0/collaborating-on-files).

![Figure 6: A file's entry view lets you act on the file, preview it, and inspect its details. If you've installed an appropriate preview plugin for a file, its preview image displays in the preview area. Liferay can, by default, preview many image types.](../../../../images/dm-file-entry-details.png)