# Editing Images

You've uploaded an image to the document library. It's almost perfect, but it's 
missing a little something. It could use a little more focus to really highlight 
the message you're trying to communicate. Just a little editing and the image 
would draw your readers in. You could edit the image in your favorite image 
editing program and re-upload it, but that's a bit tedious for the minor changes 
this image requires.

What else can you do? 

Lucky for you, @product@ has its own built-in image editor. 

A crop here and there, a little bit more contrast, and some adjustments in 
saturation, and boom! The image is ready to go. 

To access the image editor, go to the Documents and Media repository and locate 
the image you want to edit. Click the Actions icon 
(![Actions](../../../../images/icon-actions.png)) and select *Edit With Image 
Editor*.

![Figure 1: You can access the image editor through the Documents and Media repository.](../../../../images/image-editor-docs-and-media.png)

The image editor can also be accessed through an item selector. Anywhere an 
image is, you can edit it. For example, you can access the image editor via item 
selector preview windows in blog entries and web content articles. To do this, 
click the pencil icon 
(![Pencil](../../../../images/icon-edit-pencil.png)) in the bottom-right corner 
of the preview window. 

![Figure 2: You can access the image editor through the item selector preview window.](../../../../images/image-editor-preview-window.png)

The image editor was designed with quick editing in mind, and offers a minimal, 
user-friendly UI:

![Figure 3: The image editor's UI is clear and to the point, offering only what you need.](../../../../images/image-editor-tools.png)

The main toolbar consists of three buttons, each of which contain a subset of
options. The menu options are described below:

**Transform** (![Transform](../../../../images/icon-transform.png))

    -   **Rotate**: Lets you rotate the image to the left or right, in 90 degree
        increments.
    -   **Resize**: Lets you resize the image in pixels. If the lock is closed, 
        the aspect ratio remains locked, and changing either width or height 
        will automatically adjust the other dimension to maintain the aspect 
        ratio. When the lock is opened, the width and height can be changed 
        individually, allowing the aspect ratio to be altered. This is not 
        recommended though, as the image can become distorted.
    -   **Crop**: Lets you reframe the image, by removing the outer portions.

**Adjustment** (![Adjustment](../../../../images/icon-adjustment.png))

    -   **Saturation**: Lets you adjust the amount of color saturation in the 
        image. The default value of 50 is the current saturation. The slider 
        values range from 0(completely desaturated) to 100(completely 
        saturated). 
    -   **Contrast**: Lets you adjust the difference between highlights and 
        shadows. A value of 50 is the current level of contrast. The slider 
        values range from 0 (no contrast) to 100 (full contrast). 
    -   **Brightness**: Lets you adjust the amount of light in the image. A 
        value of 50 is the current brightness. The slider ranges from 0 
        (completely black) to 100 (completely white). 

**Filter** (![Wand](../../../../images/icon-wand.png))

![Figure 4: Select from a set of preset image filters.](../../../../images/image-editor-filters.png)

Upon editing the image in the editor, you can click the *Cancel* button to 
cancel the changes, or the *Apply* button to apply the changes. The history bar 
appears upon applying the changes. It lets you undo, redo, or reset the changes. 
Use the Reset button with caution; it resets the image to its original state, 
reverting all changes made in the editor. 

![Figure 5: The history bar lets you undo, redo, and reset changes.](../../../../images/image-editor-history-bar.png)

As mentioned earlier, you can access the image editor in the Documents and Media
repository, or in the item selector in blogs and web content articles. If you 
edit and save the image in the Documents and Media repository, the file version 
is incremented a minor version (e.g., from version 1.0 to version 1.1). You can 
view the image's version history (and previous versions) by selecting the image, 
clicking its *Info* button (![**i**](../../../../images/icon-information.png)), 
and then selecting *Versions* from the menu currently set to *Details*. In 
contrast, if you edit and save an image via an item selector, a copy of the 
image is created and saved to the document library. 
