# Using the Mobile SDK Instead of Screenlets

In this Learning Path's previous sections, you developed an app that retrieved 
and displayed guestbooks and entries from the Guestbooks portlet developed in 
[the Liferay MVC Learning Path](/develop/learning-paths/mvc). You did this by 
creating two new Screenlets: Get Guestbooks Screenlet and Get Entries Screenlet. 
Creating these Screenlets, however, isn't required. You could accomplish the 
same thing by calling the Mobile SDK directly in your app's activity or fragment 
code, and skip the extra time it takes to write the Screenlet components. So why 
bother creating Screenlets? 

Creating Screenlets for your custom portlets is a best practice for several 
reasons. One is that you create them by using a consistent, repeatable 
development model. This means that similar Screenlets have similar code, as is 
the case between the Get Guestbooks and Get Entries Screenlets. You can 
therefore reuse parts of an existing Screenlet's code when creating another, 
similar Screenlet. Another benefit of creating your own Screenlets is that you 
can package and distribute Screenlets for reuse in other apps. This ends up 
saving a great deal of time if your organization has several apps that need to 
display similar data. This also saves time if your organization rebrands or 
adopts different logos, since Screenlet UIs are fully pluggable. 

Consider the case of a hypothetical automotive parts business called *Jalopy, 
Inc*. To keep track of its inventory, Jalopy has a Liferay instance with a 
custom parts inventory portlet. Everyone in Jalopy's massive warehouse, even 
though they have different job roles, depends on this portlet. And they need 
access to it from their mobile devices while they're on the warehouse floor. By 
developing and packaging a Screenlet for viewing this portlet's contents, 
Jalopy's mobile developers can use the Screenlet in different apps that are 
tailored to each warehouse department's requirements. This saves them from 
having to reinvent the wheel each time they develop an app that displays the 
inventory portlet's contents. And when Jalopy decides to rebrand (let's face it, 
*Jalopy* isn't a confidence inspiring name for an auto parts business), they can 
change the Screenlet's UI and this change will be reflected in all the apps that 
use the Screenlet. There's no need to make the change separately in each app 
that uses the Screenlet. 

But what if you only need to create a single app? What if no one else needs to 
use your Screenlets? We still recommend creating Screenlets. In this case, you 
create any Screenlets you need in their own packages inside your Android 
project, separate from the package containing the rest of your app's code. This 
is what you did when creating the Get Guestbooks and Get Entries Screenlets. 
This separation of concerns makes maintaining your app easier. Even though it 
takes longer to develop Screenlets than to use the Mobile SDK directly in your 
app's activity or fragment code, you typically end up saving time over the long 
run due Screenlets' lower maintenance requirements. 

Note, however, that there may be some situations where you don't need or want to 
create Screenlets. For example, if you need to send data to or receive data from 
your portal, and you don't need a UI to do it, then it doesn't make sense to 
create a Screenlet. Screenlets must have UIs. Also, despite the benefits of 
Screenlets, you may simply prefer using only the Mobile SDK. There's nothing 
wrong with that; the Mobile SDK is a fine product! So what would this Learning 
Path's app look like if developed with the Mobile SDK instead of the Get 
Guestbooks and Get Entry Screenlets? Although its UI is the same, its code is 
very different. The rest of the articles in this appendix walk you through the 
steps necessary to create this app. 
