# Writing an Android Application with the Liferay Mobile SDK [](id=writing-an-android-application-with-the-liferay-mobile-sdk)

Users expect to access their accounts from their mobile devices. As an intrepid
developer, you naturally want to turn these expectations into reality.
Thankfully, Liferay provides a way for your mobile apps to access portal
content and applications with the Liferay Mobile SDK! The Mobile SDK makes it
easy to call Liferay's built-in remote services as well as those of your custom
portlets. 

If you know how to develop Android apps but need a start-to-finish guide on how 
to integrate them with Liferay, you're in the right place. This Learning Path
walks you through the creation of an Android app that interacts with the
Guestbook portlet developed in the [Liferay MVC learning path](/learning-paths/-/knowledge_base/6-2/beginning-liferay-development). 

You should note that while this Learning Path provides complete code snippets of 
the app as it's developed, not every aspect of Android development is explained 
in detail. Focus is instead placed on the code that leverages the Liferay Mobile 
SDK. Therefore, you should know *at least* the basics of Android app development 
before attempting this Learning Path. Without this knowledge, you're likely to
become confused. Google provides extensive documentation of the Android APIs as
well as some basic tutorials on
[developer.android.com](http://developer.android.com/index.html). 

Basic knowledge of Android development is all you need to start working. You
needn't have completed the Liferay MVC Learning Path to obtain a working
Guestbook portlet. The complete Guestbook portlet's `.war` package is provided
for installation into your local Liferay instance. 

Now that you know what you'll be doing here, it's time to move on to the first
series of articles: Beginning Android Development with the Liferay Mobile SDK.
This article shows you how to set up a local Liferay instance and deploy the
Guestbook portlet. 
