# Publishing Files

As you create sites, you'll probably want to share files on them. Liferay's
Documents and Media library (Document Library) let's you upload and publish all
kinds of files on your sites. Pictures, videos, spreadsheets, slide
presentations and more can be stored in and shared from the Document Library.
Library instances can be scoped to a Liferay instance, site, or page, so you can
work with files where their relevant.

In this chapter, you'll learn how to add files, display them, and collaborate on
them. You can upload all kinds of files to the Document Library it even allows
for custom file types. Users can browse and view files from the Documents and
Media app or from the Media Gallery. You'll learn how to use both apps. And
lastly, you'll learn how to collaborate on files from within several
environments, including your browser, local desktop, and mobile device. We've
pulled out all the stops to make online file management as easy as possible.
Let's get the ball rolling by adding files to a Document Libary.

## Adding Files

There are several reasons why you might want to upload files to your site. You
might want to share photos and video files or embed them in web content. Or you
might simply want to back them up from your device to your site. You may have
important documents that you want to share with other users. And you might want
to collaborate on documents with other users. All of these examples include
first uploading a file to your site.

To demonstrate adding files to a Document Library, we'll use the Lunar Resort.
Resort photographers take lots of photos and video footage of resort guests
having the time of their lives. As a courtesy to the guests the staff stores
each party's photos and videos on the resrot site and shares them with the
parties. At first, you might think "How does a resort sharing of pictures and
videos relate to me and my site?" Well, even if your company isn't in the
tourism business, it probably has similar requirements for managing and
publishing files. One common need is the ability to enable specific groups of
users to store, organize, and share files. And no matter what kinds of files you
work with, the fundamentals of granting file operation permissions is the same.
Let's explore how to do this for the Lunar Resort.

The Lunar Resort needs to manage carefully who can add, view, and update groups
of files. The resort stores in their Documents and Media libraries all kinds of
files for various purposes. The libraries not only contain guest media but also
departmental documents and media. Most of the documents are meant to be only
disseminated within the departments. Using the Liferay platform we can implement
the resort's use cases. You see, Liferay's [Roles and
Permissions](/discover/portal/-/knowledge_base/7-0/roles-and-permissions) let
you precisely specify access to documents and media files. In addition,
Documents and Media's folder permissions help you organize media. Let's get
started on the right foot with the Lunar Resorts guest media files by leveraging
roles, permissions, and folders in Documents and Media.

Since the Lunar Resort's *Souvenir and Memorabilia* staff members must be able
to upload and organize guest media, let's enable a role for those purposes. Sign
in as the Liferay admin and open the the *Product Menu* (![Product
Menu](../../images/icon-menu.png)). Then navigate to *Control Panel &rarr; Users
&rarr; Roles*. If the staff group is a part of an Organization, and that
organization has a site, create an Organization Role. Otherwise, create it as a
Site Role. Name the role *Resort Guest Media Manager*. Once you've created it,
click the role's Actions icon
(![Actions](../../images/icon-actions.png)) and select *Define
Permissions*. The *Roles* screen appears, showing the *Define Permissions* tab.
In that tab, navigate to *Site Administration &rarr; Content &rarr; Documents
and Media*, select *Access in Site Administration* from the *General
Permissions* section, and click *Save*. This role will manage your special set
of media files. Once you've created the role, assign it to the users who manage
the media. Snappy Fingers (username: *snappy*) is the Lunar Resort's
trigger-happy photographer. We assigned her to the *Resort Guest Media Manager*
role.

+$$$

To learn how to create a role and define permissions for it, refer to [Roles and
Permissions](/discover/portal/-/knowledge_base/7-0/roles-and-permissions).

$$$

You've created your specialized role and assigned users to it. In the Documents
and Media library, you need a place for that role to manage Lunar Resort guest
media. A Documents and Media folder fits the bill. In the folder we'll create the
role will add, organize, and share the files. Let's navigate into your site's
Documents and Media library. 

Open the Product Menu, click on your site's name, and navigate to *Content
&rarr; Documents and Media* in for your site. The Documents and Media screen
appears and displays the Documents and Media library's *Home* (the library's
root folder). As you add files and folders to the library, they're listed here.

![Figure 1: The Documents and Media's *Home* folder starts empty. But the Add menu lets you upload all kinds of documents to the library.](../../images/dm-admin-add-menu.png)

Click the Add icon (![Add](../../images/icon-add.png)) to show what you can add
to the Document Library. You can add documents, folders, and shortcuts the same as you do
on your local file system. You can even configure access to an entirely different
repository. Here are the Add menu's options:

**Folder**: lets you create a new location in the app's file system.

**Shortcut**: allows you to create a shortcut to any document that you can view.
You can set permissions on the shortcut to specify who can access the original
document through the shortcut.

**Repository**: allows you to add an entirely new repository to your Document
Library. Refer to the [Repostory
Types](/discover/portal/-/knowledge_base/7-0/repository-types) section to learn
how to add a repository. 

**Multiple Documents**: allows you to upload several documents at once.

**Basic Document**: allows you upload a single file that you would like the
default document type, "Basic Document," to apply to. By default, basic
documents are not described by any metadata sets.

**Google Docs**: lets you create a file entry that links to a Google document.
The section *Accessing Google Docs* explains how to use this feature.

The remaining items in the Add menu are default document types that are each
described by a unique metadata set. When you add a document belonging to a
specific document type, you're presented with a form to not only specify the
file to upload but also to fill out the fields defined by the document type's
metadata set. We describe the "Contract" document type by way of example.

**Contract**: lets you upload a file that you would like the "Contract" document
type to apply to. This document type is intended to be used to describe legal
contracts. By default, contracts are described by effective date, expiration
date, contract type, status, legal reviewer, signing authority and deal name
fields. 

Any custom documents types that have been defined also appear in the Add menu.
If a document type has been created that matches the document you would like to
upload, you can select that document type from the Add menu. This associates the
metadata fields associated with the document type to your document. On selecting
a document type, you're prompted to fill out the fields associated with it.

Let's continue with our example and create folders to organize the Lunar Resort
guest photos and videos that we'll upload. From the document library's Add menu,
select *Folder*. The new folder form appears. Since the folder is for storing
Lunar Resort guest media, name the folder *Resort Guest Media*. You can
optionally describe the folder. Initially anyone can view the folder, but we'll
change that after we create it. Expand the *Permissions* section. By default,
site members are able to add files, subfolders, and shortcuts and subscribe to
changes to the folder's files. Click the *More Options* link and deselect all of
these checkboxes, as we only want resort media managers to modify the folder's
files. Click *Save* to finish creating the folder. 

Document type restrictions and workflow definitions can be associated with each
folder. Child folders inherit their parent folder's document type restrictions,
by default. If workflow is enabled for the Document Library, you can specify
workflow definitions per folder and document type. You can specify a folder's
document type restrictions and workflow definitions from the folder's edit
screen, after the folder's been created.



![Figure 2: From a folder's Edit screen, you can restrict the document types it supports and select the folder's workflow.](../../images/dm-doc-type-restrictions-and-workflow.png)

Document types are a powerful way to enforce rules for documents. For our
example, we'll keep the default supported document types and workflow settings.

You've created a folder named *Resort Guest Media*. You can now specify its
permissions. Since we only want the *Resort Guest Media Manager* role to manage
files in the folder, we must fine tune the folder's permissions. Click on the
folder's *Actions* icon (![Actions](../../images/icon-actions.png)) and select
the *Permissions* action. The Permissions window appears.

The folder permissions enable a role to perform the following actions:

**Access**: Access the folder's contents from a Windows desktop.

**Update**: Edit the folder's attributes and move the folder under a new parent
folder.

**Add Subfolder**: Create folders within the folder.

**Add Shortcut**: Create a shortcut (link) to any Documents and Media file the
role is authorized to view.

**Subscribe**: Receive email notification when files are added to or modified in
the folder.

**Add Document**: Add a new file to the folder.

**Permissions**: View and modify the folder's permissions.

**Delete**: Move the folder to the Recycle Bin.

**View**: View the folder.

Grant all the permissions to the *Resort Guest Media Manager* role, revoke all
permissions from all the other roles, and click *Save*. Users assigned to the
role are now the only non-admin users who can upload and manage media files in
the folder.

You've created the *Resort Guest Media* folder and set appropriate permissions
for it. While you're signed in as the admin user, click on Documents and Media's
Options icon (![Options](../../images/icon-app-options.png)) and select
*Configuration*. From here you can specify the email sender and email templates
for email sent to Document Library folder subscribers. If you want to keep the
defaults, close the *Configuration* window.

Now, sign in as a *Resort Guest Media Manager* role user. Since Snappy, the
Lunar Resort's photographer, belongs to this role, we'll sign in as her. To open
the folder, go to *Documents and Media* in Site Administration, navigate to the
*Resort Guest Media* folder, and click the folder's name. The folder provides a
workspace for role members to manage files and subfolders.

Snappy has plenty of pictures of guests Mr. and Mrs. Spacey on her local file
system. To separate the Spacey's files from those of other guests, we'll create a
subfolder named *Spacey Party*. To create it, click the Add icon, and select the
*Subfolder* action. In the *New Folder* form that appears, name the folder
*Spacey Party* and describe the folder's purpose (e.g., "The Spacey's photos from
their visit to the Lunar Resort on some-date"). Click the *More Options* link
and deselect all the permissions within it, as we only want media managers to be
able to edit the folder. *Save* the new subfolder. You're returned to the folder
*Resort Guest Media*, which now lists your new subfolder *Spacey Party*. Navigate
into the subfolder. The Document and Media library's navigation breadcrumbs
shows your folder's path: *Home &rarr; Resort Guest Media &rarr;Spacey Party*.

In your Document Library's *Resort Guest Media* folder, you've created a
subfolder named *Spacey Party*. Next, let's add the Spacey's photos to the
subfolder.

There are a few different ways you can add image files, or any file for that
matter. You can add them one at a time or add multiple files simultaneously.
Let's add all the images at once. Click the Add icon and select *Multiple
Documents*. The *Add Multiple Documents* screen appears and displays an area for
dropping files in. You can drag and drop files into the area, or you can browse
for and select multiple files by clicking the *Select Files* button. Use the
method that's easiest for you. As you drop in files or select files, the Add
Multiple Documents screen lists them. On the side of the screen, the *All
Selected Files* section lists several options for the files. You can fill in a
common *Description* for the files. You can also specify a *Document Type* to
apply. Since we're uploading image files, we'll use the *Basic Document* type,
which is the default type. There are also options for [categorizing and
tagging](/discover/portal/-/knowledge_base/7-0/organizing-content-with-tags-and-categories)
the selected files, and assigning them default permissions. We'll tighten up
permissions by clicking the *More Options* link and deselecting all the
permissions. When you're ready to upload the files, click *Publish*. The Add
Multiple Documents screen stays active, ready for you to add more files. When
you're done adding files, click the Back icon
(![Back](../../images/icon-back.png)) at the top of the screen. You're taken
back to the folder you're adding files to. 

![Figure 3: Documents and Media's lists files using several display styles: icon (as shown here), descriptive, and list. And breadcrumbs show the current folder's path in the library.](../../images/dm-images-in-admin.png)

Documents and Media lists your current folder's subfolders and file entries. A
file entry is the Document Library's representation of a file. It wraps the file
to better leverage it within Liferay and to associate additional information and
metadata with the file. File entries are displayed using icons, by default. You
can select either icon, descriptive, or list display style; they're shown here
from left to right: ![Display
Styles](../../images/list-view-display-styles.png). The icon display style shows
a file as a cover image. If the file is an image type file, the image is used as
the file entry's cover image. If the file isn't an image, Documents and Media
displays a generic image for that file type. Also displayed with each file icon
is the file's suffix (e.g., *JPG* for a file ending in `.jpg`), last
modification timestamp, name, and status (e.g., *Approved*, *Draft*, etc.). And
each file has an Actions menu. The actions are also available from within the
file entry's view, which we'll explore soon. The descriptive and list display
styles provide the same functionality, but display the file entries in rows.

To see the current folder's details click the *Information* icon
(![**i**](../../images/icon-information.png)). An area with the folder's name
appears. It shows the number of items in the folder. It also shows a *Subscribe*
icon ![Subscribe](../../images/icon-subscribe.png) you can select to get
notifications about files added to or modified in the folder. Lastly, the
Actions icon lists actions you can perform on the current folder. Above the
Information icon and Display Styles is a *Search* that enables you to find files
by keywords.

On the other side of the *Folders* tab also in the top area are several icons
for filtering on folders and files. The *All* option (default) shows all of the
current folder's immediate subfolders and files. The *Recent* filter shows the
most recently modified files, *Mine* lists all the current user's files (no
matter their folder), and *Document Types* filters on files of the selected
document type. If a Document Library contains more documents than it can display
at once, you can use the navigation tool at the bottom of the app's window to
either switch your view to another page or configure the page to display more
documents per page.

Just above the file list, the *Order by* selector lets you select criteria for
ordering the files and folders. You can order them by creation date, title,
number of downloads, modification date (default), or size. The up and down
arrows let you arrange them in ascending or descending order.

From the list view, Documents and Media lets you act on one or more files at
once. When you select a checkbox for one or more files, the following action
icons appear: ![Action Icons](../../images/dm-action-icons.png). Describing them
from left to right, the X is for cancelling file checkout, the secured lock is
for file check-in, the unsecured lock is for file check-out, the arrows are for
moving the files, and the trash can is for moving files to the Recycle Bin. You
can also move selected files to a subfolder via drag and drop. File check-out
and check-in is explained later in [Collaborating on
Files](/discover/portal/-/knowledge_base/7-0/publishing-files#collaborating-on-files).

![Figure 4: A file's entry view lets you act on the file, preview it, and inspect its details. If you've installed an appropriate preview plugin for a file, its preview image displays in the preview area. Liferay can, by default, preview many image types.](../../images/dm-file-entry-details.png)

You've added several files to the *Spacey Party* folder. In the Document Library,
each file has a file entry view. To open its file entry view, click the file's
name. The screen's central viewing area displays a preview image of the file. If
the file is an image file, its image is displayed. If a preview plugin for the
file type is installed, the plugin displays an image (e.g., the opening scene of
a video file or a presentation's first slide) for the file. If there are no
preview plugins for the file, Liferay displays a generic image based on the
file's type. Let's take a moment and consider file preview plugins and some of
the powerful features they offer. 

Whenever possible, Liferay generates previews of documents added to the Document
Library. Out of the box, Liferay only ships with Java-based APIs to generate
previews for documents. The only tool available that is 100% Java and has a
compatible license to be distributed with Liferay is PDFBox. If you upload a PDF
file to Documents and Media, Liferay generates a preview for the PDF
in a separate thread. This process may last only a few seconds for a small file.
The larger the file, the longer it takes.

While a default implementation of image generation for document previews and
thumbnails is provided via PDFBox, you must install and configure some
additional tools to harness the full power of Liferay's Documents and Media
library. These tools include [*OpenOffice*](http://www.openoffice.org) or
[*LibreOffice*](http://www.libreoffice.org),
[*ImageMagick*](http://www.imagemagick.org), which requires
[*Ghostscript*](http://www.ghostscript.com), and
[*Xuggler*](http://www.xuggle.com/xuggler). With these tools installed and
configured, Documents and Media content is displayed using a customized viewer
depending on the type of content. Configuring Liferay to use OpenOffice or
LibreOffice in server mode allows you to generate thumbnails and previews for
supported file types (.pdf, .docx, .odt, .ppt, .odp, etc.), lets you view
documents in your browser, and lets you convert documents. ImageMagick allows
for faster and higher-quality previews and conversions. Xuggler allows for audio
and video previews, lets you play audio and video files in your browser, and
extracts thumbnails from video files. You can configure the tools via portal
properties you can set in the Control Panel's Server Administration screen or in
a `portal-ext.properties` file. To learn how to use these tools, refer to
[Configuring
Liferay](/discover/portal/-/knowledge_base/7-0/configuring-liferay).

You can view a document with a customized viewer that allows you to navigate
through the different pages of the document and read its content. In addition,
you can view a multimedia document (audio or video) and play it online. If the
browser supports HTML5, it uses the browser's native player. Otherwise it falls
back to a Flash player.

![Figure 5: By leveraging services like Xuggler and ImageMagick, you can watch a video clip or even view a slideshow inside Liferay's Documents and Media app.](../../images/dm-file-entry-video-preview.png)

Document previews are powerful and help users browse media more successfully to
find what they're looking for.

Above the file viewing area are the file's icon and the file entry's name,
author, upload timestamp, and rating. You can rate the file too. The comments
area below the file viewing area lets you comment on the file, subscribe to
comments, and reply to comments.

A file's actions are listed at the top of the file entry screen. Here are the
file actions:

**Download**: Downloads the file to your device.

**Edit**: Lets you modify the file's name, description, document type,
categorization, and [related
assets](/discover/portal/-/knowledge_base/7-0/publishing-content-dyanmically).
You can even upload a new file to replace it. Note, modifying the file
increments its version.

**Move**: Relocate the file to a different parent folder.

**Checkout/Checkin**: Checkout prevents others from modifying the document while
you are working. Other users can still view the current version of the document
if they have permission. You can check in the document when you're done working.

**Permissions**: Lets you specify which actions each role can perform on the
file. You can granted a role permission to perform the following actions.

- **Update**: Edit, checkout, and checkin the file.

- **Override Checkout**: Checkout the file, revoking the file's currrent
checkout if it is checked out.

- **Permissions**: View and configure this file's permissions.

- **Delete**: Move the file to the Recycle Bin.

- **View**: View the file.

- **Update Discussion**: Edit another user's comment on the file.

- **Delete Discussion**: Delete any comments on the file.

- **Add Discussion**: Comment on the file. 

- **Move to the Recycle Bin**: Remove the file from the Documents and Media
library to the Recycle Bin. 

File entry details are listed beside the file entry's main viewing area. The top
portion of this area lists the file's version number, status, modification
timestamp, and name of the user who last modified it. Next are links to download
the file and links to show its URL and WebDAV URL. You can specify the WebDAV
URL as the file name when opening the document from a desktop environment.

The section *Automatically Extracted Metadata* lists any and all metadata that's
been extracted automatically from the file. When adding new documents or viewing
existing documents, a process is triggered automatically that extracts the
file's metadata. The library used by this process is TIKA and it's already
included in Liferay out of the box. Depending on your file's type and the
metadata written with the file, you can find out all kinds of details. In the
case of audio or video files, their duration is displayed.

The *Version History* section lists the different versions of the file and lets
you view, download, remove, and revert to specific file versions. File version
history actions are explained later in the section *Collaborating on Files*.

Let's review what you've done so far. First, you created a role to manage a
specific set of files for your site. You assigned users to the role and created
a Documents and Media folder named *Resort Guest Media* for them to add and
organize files. Then as a member of the role, you added a subfolder named *Spacey
Party* and added files to it. And just now, you viewed individual file entry
information and actions. Next, let's explore how you can access Google documents
from your document libraries.

## Accessing Google Docs

The Document Library not only lets you upload files but also allows you to
access files stored in Google applications, such as Google Drive and Google
Photos. This integration with Google and other external repositories enables you
to access all of your documents from your Liferay sites. 

As a Liferay administrator, you must configure your Liferay instance's access to
Google's API Picker. Liferay calls on it to access files stored in Google's
apps. Your Liferay instance must use a unique API keys and client ID to invoke
the Google API Picker. The API key is used for accessing public data and the
client ID is for authenticating and authorizing user access to non-public data.
You must use a Google developer project to access the API picker using an API
key and client ID. The three basic steps are as follows:

- **Step 1: Enable the Google API Picker**

- **Step 2: Create Credentials**

- **Step 3: Configure Liferay's Google Apps Settings**

Let's start by enabling the Google API Picker in a Google developer project. 

### Step 1: Enable the Google API Picker

Liferay uses the *Google API Picker* to access files in Google. 

1. Create a Google account (or use an existing one). 

2. Open the Google Developer Console at <https://console.developers.google.com>.

3. Create a new project (or use an existing one). 

4. In the console's product and services menu, click on the API Manager. An
overview screen lists the Google APIs. 

5. In the list of Google APIs, find the *Google API Picker* and enable it.
Liferay uses the API to access Google documents. 

Next we'll create credentials to use with the Google API. 

### Step 2: Create Credentials

1. In the API Manager navigation, click on *Credentials*. 

2. Create a new OAuth client ID for a *Web application*. Specify the following appributes:
    -   **Name**: `Google Docs Hook`
    -   **Authorized JavaScript origins**: `<liferay-instance-URL>` (for
        example, `http://localhost:8080` for development machines) 
    -   **Authorized redirect URIs**: `<liferay-instance-URL>/oath2callback`

3. Create a new API key of type *Browser key*. Specify your Liferay instance's
URL in the field listing sites from which your Google project should accept
requests.

Your new OAuth client ID and public API access key are listed in your Google
project's credentials. Keep the credentials screen open so you can easily
reference these values as you specify them in Liferay. All that's left is to
enter the API key and client ID into your Liferay instance's Google Apps
configuration. 

### Step 3: Configure Liferay's Google Apps Settings

To call Google's APIs, you must configure your Liferay instance with your Google
project's OAuth client ID and public API access key. 

1. From Liferay's *Control Panel*, navigate to *Configuration &rarr;
Instance Settings*.

2. Click on the *Miscellaneous* tab and expand the *Google Apps*
section.

3. In the Google Apps section, enter your Google project's public API access API
key as the *Google Apps API Key* value.

4. Enter the Google project's OAuth client ID as the *Google Client ID* value. 

5. *Save* your changes. 

Your Liferay instance is ready to access Google documents from the Document
Library. 

### Linking to Google Docs

In your Document Library, you can create file entries that link to Google
documents, such as files stored in Google Drive or photos saved to Google. To
link to a Google doc in Documents and Media, click the Add icon
(![Add](../../images/icon-add.png)) and select *Google Docs*. The *New Google
Docs* screen appears. 

The Google docs edit screen is similar to the edit screen for basic documents,
except for file selection. Clicking on the *Select File* button for Google
Docs brings up Google's file picker. It lets you select files from your Google
Drive or your photos. Select the Google file you want to link to and click
*Publish*. 

![Figure 6: You can select files from Google Drive or your photos.](../../images/dm-google-select-a-file.png)

A new file entry appears for the Google document you linked to. You can view the
file entry as you would any file entry. Contents of the Google doc shows in the
file entry preview pane. To edit the doc, click on the button *Edit
in Google Docs*. If you own the Google doc, or if you've already been granted
permission to access it, a new browser tab opens to the document in the Google
application. A window appears otherwise, that lets you request permission to
access the document. 

![Figure 7: The Google doc file entry view comes with an action to edit the doc and displays file entry information.](../../images/dm-google-doc-file-entry.png)

You now know how to access Google docs from your document libraries. Next, let's
pick up with our Lunar Resort guest photos example as we consider how to display
files on site pages. 

## Displaying Files

Once you've uploaded image files and videos to your Document Library, you'll
probably want to display them in your site. Here are some ways of you can
display your image files:

- Insert them in an asset, like a Web Content article or Blogs Entry
- Use the Asset Publisher
- Display them in a Media Gallery
- Show them in a Documents and Media app

Continuing with the Lunar Resort example, the media team sits down with each
guest party to show them a page filled with photos and videos of their vacation
experience. The team likes to show guests a slideshow to get some oohs and ahh's
from them and determine their favorites. Then they offer to print and frame the
photos and plaster the photos on all kinds of fun items like keychains, coffee
mugs, and tee-shirts. They even burn the media onto a DVD. Let's explore how the
media team shows off the guest's pics and videos.

The media team creates a page for each guest party. Team members can customize
each page to focus on and show off the party's media. Each guest's media page
starts with a Documents and Media app and has a Media Gallery app below it. The
Documents and Media app shows thumbnail images of all the files and makes them
accessible for download. The Media Gallery comes with slideshow capabilities and
enables the staff member to download an archive of the folder's files. Let's
create a media page for the Spaceys and add these apps to it.

Add a page with a one column layout and name it *Spacey Party*. Then, add the
*Documents and Media* application to the page. It's in the *Content Management*
section of the *Applications* menu. The Documents and Media app shows your Home
folder's files by default. The app lets you browse, add, and act on files just
as you do in Site Administration. Since we want to focus on the Spacey's files,
let's configure the app to show files from the *Spacey Party* Document Library
folder. Click the Documents and Media app's Options icon
(![Options](../../images/icon-app-options.png)) and select *Configuration*. The
Configuration window appears and shows the *Setup* tab's sub-tab *Display
Settings*.

The Display Settings tab has these sections: Display Settings, Folders Listing,
Entries Listing for List Display Style, and Ratings. The Display Settings
section provides checkboxes to enable showing each file's actions, file search,
and the file filters. File search is enabled by default. The settings also let
you set the maximum number of file entries to display per page. And lastly, you
can select display styles (e.g., Icon, Descriptive, and List) to make available
to the app's users. The Icon display style is selected by default.

The Folders Listing section lets you select a Document Library folder to serve
as the root folder from which to display files. The root folder is the
highest-level folder that's accessible from the Documents and Media app. For
example, suppose you created a folder called *My Documents* in Documents and
Media's default Home folder. If you set the My Documents folder to be your app's
new root folder, the app no longer accesses the Home folder.

The last two Display Settings tab's sections are the Entries Listing for List
Display Style section and Ratings section. The former section allows you to
select fields to show for each file, if app users select the List display style.
The Ratings section lets you enable users to rate files and comment on them.

Here are descriptions for the Documents and Media app's other configuration tabs:

**Permissions**: shows Liferay's permissions dialog for the application.

**Communication**: lists public render parameters the application publishes to
other applications on the page. Other applications can read these and take
actions based on them. For each shared parameter, you can specify whether to
allow communication using the parameter and select which incoming parameter can
populate it. 

**Sharing**: lets you embed the application instance as a widget on on any
website, Facebook, or Netvibes, or as an OpenSocial Gadget.

**Scope**: lets you specify the Document Library instance the application uses:
the current site's instance (default), global instance, or the page's instance.
If the page doesn't already have an instance of the app, you can select scope
option *+ \[Page Name\] \(Create New\)* to create a page-scoped instance for the
application to display. 

While we're in the Configuration window there are a couple things we should do.
First select the *Display Settings* tab. To enable the media team role member to
act on the files, select the *Show Actions* checkbox. Since we only want to show
the Spacey's files, click *Select* to browse and select the *Spacey Party* folder.
To save your settings, click *Save*. The Documents and Media app now shows all
of the Spacey's files. This app enables the Lunar Resort media team to act on
individual files. If Mrs. Spacey likes particular files, the staff member can
download them locally and add notes in each file entry's comments.

The Documents and Media app is great for working with files individually, but
the Media Gallery has slideshow features built in. Plus, it lets you download a
folder's files as an archive. The Media Gallery app is also in the *Add &rarr;
Applications* menu's *Content Management* section. Add the Media Gallery below
the Documents and Media app on your page. By default, it displays the Documents
and Media library's home folder's files. Bring up the Media Gallery's
Configuration window, to set up the Media Gallery. The Media Gallery's settings
are very similar to the Documents and Media app's settings, but there are a
couple differences. The Media Gallery focuses only on image and video file
types, and it uses a [Display
Template](/participate/liferaypedia/-/wiki/Main/Application+Display+Templates).
You can create your own Display Templates for the Media Gallery or select an
existing display template, like the *Carousel* display template. **Important**:
To access the Carousel display template in Media Gallery, your role must have
*View* access for that template. Since the Carousel template is in the Global
scope, a Global scope administrator must grant the role permission to view the
template. The Media Gallery also has configuration tabs for communication,
permissions, preferences, and scope. In the app's Display Settings, select
checkboxes *Show Actions* and *Show Folder Menu*. In the *Folder Settings*
section, select the *Spacey Party* folder as the app's root folder and click
*Save*.

The Spacey Party image file thumbnails display in the Media Gallery. When you
click on a file's thumbnail, a slideshow appears showing the selected image. The
window lists thumbnails of the folder's other images below the image that's
currently shown. And the slideshow continues until you either click pause or
view the folder's last image. The slideshow feature provides a nice way to show
off images. Click the X to close the slideshow window and return to the page. 

![Figure 8: The Media Gallery's slideshow provides a nice way to view images.](../../images/dm-media-gallery-slideshow.png)

Clicking the folder's Actions icon (![Actions](../../images/icon-actions.png))
lists actions you can perform with respect to the folder. For the Lunar Resort
media team, the *Download* action is very useful. The action creates an archive
of the folder's files and dowloads them to your machine. The resort media staff
burns a copy of the downloaded files onto a disk and sells them to the guests
for a fair price. 

Here are the folder actions available in the Media Gallery:

**Download**: Downloads an archive of the files to your device.

**Edit**: Lets you modify the folder's name, description, document type, and
workflow restrictions

**Move**: Relocates the folder to a different parent folder. 

**Permissions**: Lets you specify which actions each role can perform on the
folder. 

**Add Subfolder**: Creates a folder within this folder.

**Add File Entry**: Lets you upload a file to the folder as a new file entry.

**Multiple Media**: Allows you to upload several files at once.

**View Slide Show**: Opens a window that shows the files in actual size in a
slide show on your device. 

**Add Shortcut**: Enables you to create a shortcut (link) to any Documents and
Media file the user is authorized to view. You can set permissions on the
shortcut to specify who can access the original document through the shortcut.

**Access from Desktop**: Makes the folder available to work with from a
desktop environment.

**Move to the Recycle Bin**: Removes the file from the Documents and Media
library to the Recycle Bin. 

The Documents and Media app and Media Gallery are at your service to show
off your Document Library files. The Lunar Resort's Souvenir and Memorabilia
group enjoys patron reactions to the great pics and videos that Snappy takes of
them. And the salespeople are more than happy to plaster the pictures onto
clothing and accessories to make a handsome commision. 

Next, we'll step out of the Lunar Resort's Souvenir and Memorabilia group and
Document Library file collaboration.

## Collaborating on Files

Not only does Liferay's Documents and Media enable you to publish files easily,
but it also provides a terrific environment for collaborating on documents.
There are many common collaboration scenarios. For example, you might have a
spreadsheet that you and your peers need to populate, or a proposal that you and
other stakeholders must produce. You might be asked to review and edit a
document. All these cases involve multiple users modifying documents and require
an environment that helps manage document changes. Liferay's Documents and Media
provides these capabilities. 

Liferay's document management apps support accessing apps on different kinds of
devices and and environments. Not only can you access documents from your site
via your browser, but you can also access them from your native file browser and
use Liferay Sync to access them from your tablet or mobile device. And Liferay
Sync makes sure you're you can access the latest document versions. 

To demonstrate using these features, we'll join the Lunar Resort
Recreation Department members collaboration on an important document: the Lunar
Resort's upcoming activiters newsletter. Resort representatives from each activity
group must contribute content to entice resort guests to sign up for activities.
Staff members involved include Chip Shot (golf insructor), Wilma Carwin (lunar
rover race instructor), and Tenzing Nepal (lunar sherpa). Each of them use
different devices and bring their own style and attitude to the collaboration.
So perhaps you'll be able to relate to their effort.

Before the group leads can start working on the newsletter, the department
director (who's associated with the organization's content administrator Role)
creates a folder called *Newsletters* in the organization's document library. To
follow along with the example, create the *Newsletters* folder in an
organization's document library on your site. This folder will hold all of the department's
newsletters.

Next, open your favorite document editor, enter the title "Upcoming Lunar
Activities", and save the document as `upcoming-activities.docx`. Upload the
file to the document library and enable the leads to edit the file by
associating them with Role that you grant permission to edit the file. To enable
the activity leads to access the newsletter from the department's private
Organization Site, add a Documents and Media app to its home page. Then turn on
the *Show actions* display option in the app's configuration window. Make sure
to assign the leads a role with permissions to access the folder. From the
Documents and Media app on Recreation Department's private home page, the leads
can now access the *Newsletters* folder and the initial document. The
newsletter's next collaborator will be Tenzing Nepal, the resort's veteran lunar
sherpa.

Tenzing is as agile online as he is on a mountainside. He often edits his
documents across several versions so they read just as he likes them. He prefers
to check documents out from within the web interface and download them to his
computer to work on them. Let's follow Tenzing as he produces multiple versions
of the newsletter. 

### Creating New File Versions

To prevent other users from accicentally overwriting changes you're making to a
document, the Document Library allows you to *checkout* the document. The user
who checks out a file is the only user who can checkin changes to the file.
Checking in a file produces a new file version. 

Tenzing Nepal is the first resort instructor to edit the activities newsletter.
You can imitate Tenzing's actions or follow along as you create new versions of
your own files. Inside the Documents and Media app, select the
`upcoming-activities.docx` file's *Checkout* action. Upon checkout, the file's
status is *Draft*. While the file is checked out, you're the sole editor; all
other users must wait until after you've checked in the file to edit it. While
you have the file checked out, you can download it, replace the file entry's
file, move the file entry to another Document Library folder, check it in, or
cancel checkout. Tenzing proceeds with the next step towards contributing to the
file.

Unless you're using [Liferay Sync](/discover/portal/-/knowledge_base/7-0/using-liferay-sync-on-your-desktop)
or a local drive mapped to the file's WebDAV (explained in the next section)
URL, you'll typically follow the basic workflow below to edit a Document Library
file from your machine:

1. **Checkout** the file.
2. **Download** the file and edit it locally.
3. Edit the file locally.
4. From the file's Edit screen in Documents and Media, browse to and select the
local file. Save and Checkin
5. Check in the file.

Let's continue as Tenzing, following the above worklow. (1) You've already
checked out the file. (2) Download the file to your machine by clicking the
*Download* action. (3) Then open the file in your favorite document editor, add
information on the upcoming Lunar hikes, and saves your changes. You're now
ready to apply the changes to file in Documents and Media.

In the file entry's screen in Documents and Media, click on the *Edit* action.
Then click *Browse*, navigate to the copy of the `upcoming-activities.docx` file
you edited on your desktop, and select it. Then click the *Save and Check In*
button and the *Describe Your Changes* screen appears. This screen allows you to
describe your changes and specify whether to apply a major or minor version
increment (default). For example, if a file's current version is 1.0, the file's
next minor version is 1.1 and next major version would be 2.0. To increment the
file to a new *Major Version*, you must select the *Changes Create a Major
Version* checkbox. Your changes will otherwise result in a new Minor Version.

Select the *Changes Create a Major Version* checkbox, describe your changes in
the *Change Log* field, and click *Save*. The file's major version number is
incremented and its status is now *Approved*.

+$$$

**Note**: If you *Edit* a file without checking it out, the Edit screen displays
a checkbox *Customize the Version Number Increment and Describe My Changes*. For
your file modification, if you want to select between major/minor version types
and/or want to enter a change log then select the checkbox. On clicking
*Publish*, the *Describe Your Changes* screen appears so you can specify your
change's version increment type and description.

$$$

Since the file is checked in, any user can now check it out. Tenzing realizes
there are some minor details he wants to add. As Tenzing, checkout the file once
again. Download the file locally, make the changes (any changes you like), and
save the local file. Then edit the file entry in Documents in Media, browse to
and select your local file, and click *Save and Check In*. This time, leave the
major version selection unchecked and click *Save*. The file is checked in and
it's minor version number is incremented. 

![Figure 9: No file is "written in stone". Version history actions let you inspect, delete, and reinstate file versions.](../../images/dm-file-version-actions.png)

In the file entry's screen, the *Version History* table lists the versions of
the file. The department director created version 1.0, Tenzing created major
version 2.0, and Tenzing also created minor version 2.1. Each file version has
an Actions icon ([Actions](../../images/icon-dm-file-version-actions.png). You
can perform the following actions on each file version that's been checked in
and approved (if no workflow is associated with a folder, the file's approved on
checkin):

**Download**: Download the version of the file to your machine.

**View**: View the file entry screen for the version of the file.

**Revert**: Check in a new major version of the file based on that file version.

**Delete Version**: Remove the file version from the Document Library. All other
file versions remain intact.

You've used the basic Document Library workflow to edit files locally and upload
them to create new file versions of the newsletter. Next up is accessing
documents from your desktop file manager. To demonstrate this, you'll step into
the shoes of lunar rover race instructor Wilma Carwin.

Wilma updates the newsletter in a different manner. She doesn't care much for
high tech. The only online device she uses is the workstation in the garage
office. Wilma only uses it when she has to; otherwise she'd rather be behind the
wheel of a rover doing donuts in the dirt and banking turns off the canyon
walls. Fortunately for Wilma, the resort IT team mapped the rec department's
document library to a network drive on her workstation. This lets her edit
documents without having to meddle with the Lunar Resort site. It's worth
explaining how they integrated her file manager with the document library. 

### Desktop Access to Documents and Media

You can access the Document Library from your computer's file manager via
WebDAV. WebDAV stands for Web-based Distributed Authoring and Versioning. It's a
set of methods based on HTTP that allows users to create, edit, move, or delete
files stored on web servers. WebDAV is supported by most major operating systems
and desktop environments, including Linux (both KDE and GNOME), Mac OS, and
Windows.

At the Lunar Resort, Activity Department members use WebDAV to access their
Document Library. WebDAV provides an alternative way to do this using a file
manager instead of a web browser. To access the Document Library folder from
your file browser, you need to use log in credentials for the Liferay instance
and the WebDAV URL of the folder you'd like to access.

Navigate to the Documents and Media app hosting the folder you'd like to access.
Click on the folder's Actions icon ![Actions](../../images/icon-actions.png) and
select *Access from Desktop*.

![Figure 10: Select *Access from Desktop* to get the the folder's WebDAV URL.](../../images/dm-access-from-desktop-action.png)

Copy the WebDAV URL. On Windows, map a network drive drive to the WebDAV URL.
Enter your Liferay credentials when you're prompted for them. The document
library folder appears in the network drive. From your file browser, you can now
add, edit, move, or delete files in this folder.

On Mac OS X, select *Go* &rarr; *Connect to Server* in Finder. Then enter the
WebDAV URL of the folder you'd like to access in the Server Address field, click
*Connect* and you should be prompted for your Liferay credentials.

On Linux, you must slightly modify the WebDAV URL of your folder in your file
manager. For KDE's Dolphin, change the URL's protocol so that it says
`webdav://` instead of `http://`. For GNOME's Nautilus, change the URL's
protocol so that it says `dav://` instead of `http://`. Then press *Enter* and
you're prompted for your Liferay credentials.

Note that Liferay increments the version numbers of files edited and uploaded
via WebDAV so you don't have to worry that using your file manager will bypass
the functionality of Liferay's web interface. 

Lunar rover race instructor Wilma Carwin doesn't mind editing her Documents and
Media files from her computer's file manager, because it's convenient and
easiest for her. She opens the document `upcoming-activites.docx` and adds news
about various types of rover racing lessons offered and the upcoming Lunar Grand
Prix. She saves the file and closes it. The file in Documents and Media is now
"Approved" and its minor version is incremented. Voila! She's done her part
collaborating on the newsletter.

Following Wilma Carwin's demonstration, you've learned how to map your local file
manager to a Document Library folder and collaborate on files from your desktop
environment. 

## Summary

You've learned the fundamentals of uploading, managing, and collaborating on
files in your sites. The Document Library integrates each file into Liferay,
allowing you to apply permissions, workflows, and rich metadata. And it provides
a version control system for managing document progress. You displayed image
files on pages using the Media Gallery and Documents and Media apps. And you've
mastered checking out and checking in new file versions using the basic
download/upload technique and by mapping your local file manager to the Document
Library, for seemless file editing. Congratulations on your document management
accomplishements!

Now that we know the basic functionality of the Documents and Media portlet,
let's explore using document types and metadata.
