# Working Smarter with Liferay Social Office [](id=working-smarter-with-liferay-social-office)

Liferay Social Office is Liferay's social collaboration product for the
enterprise. Previously released as a separate product that was based on Liferay
Portal, it's now available as an application that can be installed on Liferay.
We are excited to bring both Social Office and this guide to you, in the hope
that you'll be able to use each to enable your teams to work together more
efficiently. 

Some time ago, we at Liferay were brainstorming some common use cases which
Liferay Portal does a good job solving. One of these is team-based
collaboration. Many of our customers have used Liferay Portal both inside their
enterprises and outside on the Internet to provide a better way of sharing
documents and data with the people they work with every day. Liferay Portal
provides a very flexible solution which allows you not only to do this, but
much, much more. Because Liferay Portal is so flexible, the path from the
initial install to a robust web site that could be used for collaboration was
not always straightforward to the new user. The Social Office plugin is designed
to allow business users to set up and use Liferay Portal for collaboration right
away.

This was not the only reason for Social Office. Internally, we realized that we
needed a product like this ourselves. We knew that, in Liferay Portal, we
already had all the features in place to make it possible. We just needed to
assemble and extend them in a way that optimally supported the scenario of
social collaboration. We also wanted to make setup as easy as possible for new
users. In this way, Social Office was born. We created the product to provide
a simple, out of the box solution for team collaboration. Social Office provides
you with a fantastic array of features that you don't need to spend a lot of
time configuring. In fact, you can have a full production environment set up in
less time than it takes to brew a pot of coffee.

Social Office is a dynamic team collaboration solution for the enterprise that's
designed to streamline communication, save time, and raise productivity.
Organizations and groups can use Social Office to share resources, collaborate
on projects, and raise the visibility of important activity. Social Office
features a robust suite of integrated, easy-to-use web applications. It's ready
to use right out of the box. Once installed, a quick setup wizard will help you
set up a team collaboration site so you can begin working immediately.

Since Social Office is provided as a plugin for Liferay Portal, it inherits all
the benefits of a mature, stable solution which has been in the marketplace for
some time. You can start using Social Office's straightforward, out-of-the box
collaborative features right away. You're also free to utilize any of the more
advanced features of Liferay Portal at any time. 

This guide is for those who are setting up and administering an instance of
Liferay Portal using Social Office. From installing Social Office to introducing
you to its entire feature set, we'll discuss all of the things you can do with
Social Office to help your team. We hope you'll use it as a tool to get Social
Office up, running, and integrated into your enterprise. You can find much more
information about installation and administration in *Using Liferay Portal*
[http://www.liferay.com/documentation/liferay-portal/6.1/user-guide](http://www.liferay.com/documentation/liferay-portal/6.1/user-guide).

If you need any assistance beyond what's covered in this book, Liferay, Inc.
offers training, consulting, and support services to fill any need that you
might have. Please see
[http://www.liferay.com/services](http://www.liferay.com/services) for further
information about the services we can provide.  As always, we welcome any
feedback. If there is any way you think we could make this book better, please
feel free to mention it on our forums. You can also use any of the email
addresses on our Contact Us page
[http://www.liferay.com/contact_us](http://www.liferay.com/contact_us). We are
here to serve you, our users and customers, and to help make your experience
using Social Office the best it can be. 

## Introduction [](id=introduction)

"Help!"

This has been the cry of information workers everywhere who have tried to manage
complex projects through email and shared folders. You've probably had a similar
experience: you're collaborating on a document with a team of people and are
emailing it back and forth. Person A creates the initial document and Person
B replies with some edits. Person C replies with additional edits at the same
time Person A replies with the corrections from Person B. Person D takes this
and rewrites a whole section of the document while Person B and C respond to
Person A's update. Pretty soon, it becomes very difficult to determine which
document is the latest document.

The same scenario plays itself out when working in shared folders. Person
A creates a document and puts it in a network share. Person B edits the document
and saves it under a different file name. Person C edits it and re-saves the
original. Person A tries to reconcile the two, while Person D opens Person B's
document and saves yet another version. Before you know it, you have the same
problem you had with email: you can't tell which document is the latest
document. Additionally, you have a worse problem: you don't have a clear history
of how the document got to where it is in the first place. 

"Help!"

The Liferay Social Office plugin for Liferay Portal is designed to answer this
call for help by meeting the needs of teams who work together on projects. It's
easy to set up and makes it easier to facilitate collaboration for large and
small businesses alike. With Liferay Social Office, you'll have the system and
your workgroups up and running in no time, with all the tools necessary for them
to work more efficiently and more easily than before.
