# What can you do with Social Office? [](id=what-can-you-do-with-social-office)

Social Office gives you the social collaboration features you need to do virtual
teamwork. You can coordinate calendars and schedules, write shared blog entries,
work together on documents, discuss issues in forums, document everything in
a wiki, and more. The underlying theme is that all discussion and collaboration
is kept with the asset. What does this mean? It means that the asset, whether
that be a document, a thread, a blog entry, or a wiki article is the star around
which all of the discussion and collaboration orbits. 

Trying to collaborate on assets through email or server shares works up to
a certain point--but then it fails because it's a backwards way of doing the
work. The asset in that scenario becomes secondary, and the "wrapper"--email or
the share--becomes the primary target of the work. So instead of concentrating
on the asset which the team is trying to produce, the focus turns to the
wrapper. In the case of a shared folder, you might manually rename documents
according to a numbering scheme so everyone can tell which is the latest--that
is, until someone forgets to do so, or until someone accidentally overwrites the
latest document. In the case of email, users try to navigate huge threads while
passing an asset back and forth--until someone forgets to "reply all" or until
someone starts a new thread (and maybe forgets to put the whole list on the
thread). Working in the mediums of shared folders or email puts the focus on
working with the wrapper, not the asset. And so the asset gets lost because
they're forced to focus on the wrapper instead of the asset. With Social Office,
you'll be free to concentrate on the assets--the system gets out of your way so
that it's a simple matter for your team to work together. 
